---
layout: post
title: Rust 2020
---

A week ago, the rust language team has [called for blog posts] about the future of the rust language.

I am not really a part of the rust community. My biggest community contribution so far was to organize a
meetup. I have recently started publishing a few open source libraries on crates.io . But here are my 2 cents
anyway.

First of all, I absolutely love rust. It combines my love for writing code that is as efficient as physically
possible with my love for abstraction. I started programming on very low powered hardware (Atari 800, then C16),
so the desire to optimize things is very natural for me. In 2003 I discovered functional programming with an
obscure but totally awesome programming language called clean, and was totally blown away.

I find rust very appealing because it combines the power of abstraction from strictly typed functional languages
with the ability to write code that is as fast as physically possible.

So, what should rust focus on in 2020?

I think that rust as it is is an very expressive language. I am not sure it desperately needs major new features
at this time. Many people say that it needs higher kinded types, but I think that they should be introduced very
carefully, if at all. Rust is already a rather complex language, and for a language that strives to be used in
production it is very important not to overspend on the complexity budget.

What the rust community should focus on, IMHO, is these things:

- Education to allow people to write idiomatic rust. This is *not* easy.

People coming from statically typed functional languages will often try to reach for higher kinded types. People
coming from OO languages will often try to introduce inheritance hierarchies and reach for dynamic dispatch too
quickly. People coming from javascript/typescript will reach for functions/closures way too often and be put off
by the somewhat complex semantics of closures. People coming from the JVM will have misconceptions WRT performance.
I have seen many of these things and even did many of these mistakes myself.

- Tooling

Tooling for rust is already quite a bit better than it was in the early days of scala. Publishing something on 
crates.io is a breeze, and the vscode extension sometimes works surprisingly well. That being said things are
far from perfect. E.g. the vscode plugin is not solid. Sometimes it stops working for me for no apparent reason.
Tooling for performance optimization and coverage could be better. Also, it seems that publishing on crates.io
currently requires a github account. That is nice and convenient, but does that mean that microsoft is effectively
the guardian of the entire rust ecosystem?

- Library ecosystem

Now that async/await has landed in stable rust, the library ecosystem needs time to catch up. Also, just because
there is now async/await does not mean that it is always the best solution.


Anyway, these are my thoughts,

Rüdiger